---
layout: post
section-type: post
title: Personal Rambling
category: personal
tags: [ 'retrospect' ]
---

## This ramblings are not to be taken seriously.
I write these pieces because one day I want to stitch them up together as form of a note so that I can hand over
to people who are as dumb as I am and quickly get upto the speed. As this is the beginning of the rambling series
I will try to keep is as simple as possible. 

### What deep learning is all about (for muggles) 

We are fond of linear functions. For a second imagine as if you are not an "ML person", and want to join the cool kids, and you opened those as-overloaded, ugly posts about understanding machine learning. You would always bump into a plot like below  

[](cool_ml.png?raw=true)

It typically says that you are fitting a line like a boss to a bunch of points. We all want to do that. So much so that there is a quora question "Is all statistics is glorified curve fitting". Needless to say it is ridiculous to claim that. But for the most part at least the ML we deal with are actually curve fitting. 

But it comes with a pinch of salt, no matter how much we love the above picture, in real life that's not the case. In formal terms what we have here is a linear model (statistically linear models are models are models where the unknown coefficients of the equation are linear). 

The fitting of curve is what we call regression, the other side of this coin is classification. In classification problem we want to find a line that separates two different colored objects with a stroke. Something like the following, 

[]()

